# typographical edicts

typographical edicts, orthographic dictates, phonological suggestions, linguistic notes, etc etc, by me Wyatt S Carpenter.

People keep making fonts wrong, so here's my advice.

## Advice for normal people:

1. The bars on the top and bottom of the capital I should always be present, even in a sans-serif font (hence why I just called them "bars" and not "serifs").
2. lowercase l, the numeral 1, and capital I *must* look different. Very distinct. You may type the phrase "11 Illicit Igloos" to test this.
3. in fact, ideally every glyph in your font looks distinct. This may mean that you have to represent EG the Cyrillic alphabet in a slightly different style than the Greek alphabet, but that's fine you just do that. (Although, your font should also contemplate what happens when people italicize and blackletter-style your font, and all of those glyphs also look distinct from every other font — so your greek omicron shouldn't just be an italic latin o, for example.) (This becomes even harder when unicode adds characters to represent variantions in how letters look that you might have been depending on — like when they added unicode italics, for example ; or when they added ℴ (whatever that is).)
4. Non-lining numerals (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/non-lining_figures) just look ridiculous, and should not be used.
5. If you are designing a romanization scheme for a language, never use the dotless ı / dotted i distinction such as in Turkish and other similar languages. this will lead you into an incredible amount of technical trouble, where the very capitalization of i now depends on locale (something programmers are bad at thinking about). (For those curious, in the Turkish locale i becomes İ.)
6. italic should be a first-class citizen of unicode, as should bold. (Probably using variation selectors.)
7. everybody already knows this, but there is a difference between true italic and "oblique", where you just slant the letters a bit. (presumably there's a sort of type where you rotate all of the letters a little bit as well?) true italic is usually better; And it's always better if you actually want true italic instead of just a thing that vaguely looks like it a bit.
8. serif fonts are better than sans-serif fonts.
9. everybody is always trying to design a font that basically looks like helvetica. stop doing this. No one needs another helvetica.
10. in fact, If you could stop making fonts that are indistinguishable from other fonts we already have several variants of, that would be great. maybe instead you could actually make a single good serif font that covers every Unicode character so far, which I'm still trying to find tbh. (sometimes I think I will spend the rest of my life getting really into font design and then release an extrapolated version of the Georgia font over the entire Unicode character set (and also with lining numerals of course, instead of the current garbage) and call it Ultra-Georgia. (I pick Georgia because it was specially designed to display well on low resolution screens even though it has serifs, and they apparently did that very well because it looks great! unlike many others I've tried on crappy screens)) Or a monospace font that covers every character, so I can make monospace text diagrams without experiencing fallthrough to another font, ruining alignment.
11. I probably prefer the sorts of Chinese/Japanese/etc fonts that look like they were manually written, a bit, Song/Ming fonts, over the sorts of fonts that look like they haven't been (Gothic), because it's apparently analogous to serif vs sans serif. i don't really know, though, because i don't read Chinese 
12. Text-processing systems (like markup) should respect it when you put in a newline, and not demand you put in two newlines to get a paragraph break. Similarly, the output of such systems should be typeset like regular text: pargraphs should be indented in the next line, instead of having a whole blank line separating paragraphs. (It's more important to have the beginning indent than to lose the blank line.)
13. There is a little difference of opinion on whether the first pargraph of a text should be indented (such as, the first paragraph of a chapter under its title) or left flush with the left side of the page. Well, my opinion is that YES it should be indented. You can also use an illuminated letter there if you would like.
14. You should not use roman numerals (I, II, III, IV, etc). While every educated English speaker will be familiar with these, they are needlessly harder to understand, produce correctly, collate, and otherwise deal with. They can also be ambiguous with other things, like the word I. There's just no reason to use them.
15. Don't create more versions of markdown unless you need to (and if you need advanced features, see if someone else is also extended markdown to get it, and use the same markdown conventions as them. See also: https://blog.codinghorror.com/standard-flavored-markdown/ . However, if you WERE to create a new markdown-type thing, keep in mind that these days plain text has things like bullets (•◦) and numerical digits (0-9), so certain potential features of a markup language (such as markdown's "asterisk beginning a line begins a bulleted list") are no longer necessary — indeed, they may be undesirable. I like starting lines with * if I need a referent for an asterisk footnote! Better if lines starting with • were the unordered list elements...
 
## Novel advice:

1. There actually should be a devoted character for the apostrophe, which should not be confused with the single right quote, despite the fact that these are the same character in most traditional typography. They should not be the same character; they should be considered distinct characters instead. otherwise how are you going to know when a quotation stops? This dedicated apostrophe character should be somewhat curvy, but not as much as the single quote. But definitely more than the straight single quote! It also should not be confused with any other of the various marks that kind of look like a quotation mark or apostrophe. (Your best bet for this at the present time in unicode would be to use an apostrophe character ', style it with the font to be slightly curvy, and forget I said anything about "straight single quote" because obviously a straight quotemark is a contradiction in terms... a mad disease of the brain inspired by a lunacy caused by the dust of typewriters...)
2. Also, umlaut and diaeresis should be distinct. the umlaut should look more like ő, but not exactly. (there is technically a way in Unicode to indicate these two distinctly, as was required by a German library system)
3. I know people think there's technically a distinction between different types of dashes (en or smaller) and the hyphen and the minus, but I've never really found any of those useful. It is pretty crazy that the minus sign also looks exactly like the sign we use to make a numerical range like 1-10 (is that "1 to 10" or -9?). I'm sure the dashes help with that, if you know what the different dash lengths mean and read very carefully. (hint: minus is shorter)
4. typing the ^ above the o in the word rôle is unnecessary.
5. using the diaeresis in words like coöperate is usually unnecessary and out of style. in cases where it is necessary, it's probably clearer (to most readers) to use a hyphen like co-operate.
6. You should be able to typeset (and, indeed, even play) music entirely from a unicode representation of the sheet music (again, probably using variation selectors.
7. there are textual characters that aren't in unicode yet, mostly because they haven't found enough dusty scholar manhours yet to get a comprehensive proposal together. for example, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maya_script#Computer_encoding . so, dream big.
8. there are also textual marks that will never make it to unicode, being the idiosyncratic marks of only one source. remember that.
9. It's probably better for the space after a sentence to be more than one regular space. i don't personally hit the space baar twice, but I see the appeal. i think it would probably be better at a 1.5 space I suppose. Maybe the period being small already does this.
10. You should endeavor to use whom correctly where appropriate.
11. You should pronounce the wh phoneme as it is supposed to be, as /ʍ/ (voiceless w). This is a little bit archaic in most dialects, but it's good, based on the principle that you should pronounce distinct words distinctly. you should also go even further than that and pronounce the w h in words like who and whole as /ʍ/; this was lost in Middle English, which I usually think of as too far back to revert a change on, but we can just start doing it again. (actually, on reflection, I think the WH in who and whole is already pronounced as a WH sound (a sort of rounded h); it's just that hu and hole are usually pronounced the same way, phonologically merging into the same sound pattern (and perhaps that merge should be resisted?))
12. You also should pronounce the wr in words like write differently than a plain r. (I think this is just a more-rounded r usually? but could be realized various ways, including just a longer r, or, indeed, /wɹ/. inserting a vowel between the w and r to try to accommodate this should be avoided.) (I think the difference is probably that plain r shouldn't be rounded and wr should be, but I'm still looking into this.)
13. Caught and cot have different vowels, as to Don and dawn. For some reason the one that's spelled with an O is pronounced more like an A... (more fronted I guess) science cannot explain this. You also should not go all the way to a Wisconsin accent and pronounce the one that spelled with an O extremely like an A.
14. You should pronounce the g in words like gnostic and the k in words like know and knife. Also the p in pseudo and the p in pterodactyl. It's tough to pull these one off without looking like a fool, but you should practice just slipping it in there. Again, avoid unnessecary vowels between these consonants. They are consontant CLUSTERS, after all. Relatedly, you should pronounce the ǃ in words like ǃKung and gnu — unfortunately, no one knows how. (That is a joke; it's actually pretty easy to learn how. Although I guess, in fact, almost no English speakers know how.) While I'm on the topic: an unfortunate number of fonts seem to have not gotten the memo, and style ǃ (which is technically an underdotted vertical bar) as akin to ! (which typically has a bit more flairing) — this is unfortunate, and should stop.
15. ", the straight quote, should be conditionally rendered by fonts in the following way: next to no alphabetic characters, it renders straight, like ". at the start of alphabetic characters, it renders like “. At the end of alphabetic characters, it renders ”. in the middle of alphabet characters it renders ”. This should render correctly in all cases, including something like "x"s. however, I may not have thought of all of the subtle rules of Unicode, so I may not have described the correct answer here. The precise boundaries of alphabetic and for that matters start, might need to be specified with greater. But the idea here is that the font should just render the straight quote as a curly quote, because it's not really that ambiguous and it's not like people have stopped making straight quotes lately. The same algorithm cannot be applied to ' due to its use as apostrophe. People will just have to use ‘ and ’ correctly. (although, contra certain Unicode recommendations, I personally suggest reserving those characters for the curly single quotes, and using the apostrophe character ' as an unambiguous apostrophe, which the font would render a little bit slanted but not as slanted as the right single curly quote)
16. The best punctuation mark to indicate a rhetorical question is ⸮. ? may also be used in a pinch, or simply a . if tone of voice calls for it.
17. The best punctuation mark (although many would do) to indicate irony is the CPNB proposal 2007, a slightly kinked exclamation mark, sort of a lightning bolt with a dot under it. sadly it's not in Unicode. however, if we all start using it, eventually they'll have to add it!
18. The spanish ¿? pairing thing is a logical system that i respect... although i feel no great need to urge its adoption.
19. tabs vs spaces in programming indentation is one of those things that really has me feeling like "The only thing better than perfect is standard", as Technology Connections likes to joke. The "right" solution is tabs, for reasons detailed in this other person's blog post: https://lea.verou.me/blog/2012/01/why-tabs-are-clearly-superior/ . however, they are a more elegant control character for a more civilized age. Everyone has standardized on spaces and it's often inconsistent whether you can get tabs to enter or render properly. My joke suggestion of using an ideographic full width space each time (I prefer two space tabs anyway) was dismissed without proper consideration. some coding standards believe you should mix tabs and spaces for indentation, and it's quite possible that these people should be driven into the sea. anyway I usually use two space characters per level of indentation because it's the minimum necessary unambiguous number of space characters (so it doesn't just look like a regular space) and I like to fit a lot of code on the screen at the same time so I can ponder it all effectively. But recently I've found out some people have a hard time perceiving indentations of only two spaces correctly, so I willing to go to four spaces. Eight spaces is right out. Three spaces would perhaps be ideal but it's not a power of two so as programmers we forbid it. See also: My blog post about how Unicode will never solve this problem, but it could (sort of) (todo: link this blog post once I write it).
20. I strongly feel that Wikipedia titles should be "soft lowercase" (that is, the case of regular words as you would encounter them in a sentence) so that one can easily see if the subject of an article is supposed to be capitalized or what, and not have to hunt through mentions of the subject in the article trying to find one that isn't at the beginning of a sentence (where "subjects" in one sense so often live, being also "subjects" of another kind...) to try to confirm. This principle can probably be generalized a little to other similar documents.
   

## Blue-sky advice:

My friend John Hyde came up with a great idea, which is that if you'd like to use a question mark where a comma would go, you should write it in the position of the comma (quite small). to this I add that if you would like to use a question mark where a semicolon would go, you should write it in the position of the dot above the comma in the semicolon (again, quite small)

there should be an opening comma, a closing comma, and a list comma.

I think we need two additional marks that are like the M-Dash that are used when the M-Dash is used parenthetically (but not when it's used because the person is breaking off in speech never to return)

there can be a right-colon as well (possibly the direction of the colon should be reinforced by little triangles instead of dots)

the word i (first person pronoun) should not be capitalized. Was to make it clearer in handwriting, but now it's just less clear because I'm not sure if somebody is writing a one or if it's like the start of a different word or some part of something that's been capitalized for some reason like in a title or Roman numeral or something, more commonly now. just have it be a regular word that isn't capitalized. It's not like it's your name! me isn't capitalized.

i wnd j shouldn't have dots at all, actually. It's weird to have letters with disconnected elements so we shouldn't have them. horse might be out of the barn on that one though. Also in the time since I had this opinion advertised my opinion and I don't think it's bad to have these anymore.

instead of A through F, there should be designated hexadecimal digits. (in the optimal character encoding, byte values 00000000 to 00001111 would represent the digits from 0 to 15). they should probably be displayable on a 7-segment display, but i haven't figured out much else about them. They shouldn't be non-lining, though!

capital letters are unnecessary and could have been gotten rid of. or treated as a rich text styling! (again, though: horse, barn. at least with unicode)

it's also inconvenient to use capital letter for both proper nouns AND the beginning of sentences. ambiguous nouns can appear at the beginning of sentences! Probably, there should be a begin-sentence mark (unless the previous period is enough...) And also separate proper noun brackets, title brackets, and subtitle brackets. Like what the Japanese do around titles with their little quotation mark type things.

too many punctuation marks are used for too many things. period shouldn't be used for both abbreviation and sentence-ending. It's ambiguous! there should be a special abbreviation mark I guess, or the sentence ending period should look different (perhaps be larger, like one of the Asian language periods, especially if we're not going to have capital letters anymore...)

there should actually be one letter per sound and you should spell words by writing down exactly how you pronounce them. The spelling will change over time. So what? things already change over time.

If you do need to have a standardized spelling, you should have one that stays stable for exactly a hundred years and so you have a standardized spelling for X0XX, X1XX, and you can easily tell which dictionary to consult based on the date of the document.

Advice for programming? (coming soon?)

programming is traditionally done in monospace, which has the advantage that you can learn pretty easily where on the page your eyes should jump to to see things (i cannot prove this). it's also traditionally displayed on a screen in colored text, colored based on the syntax of the program language, which is good because it reminds you of the syntax of the programming language, and how this program fits into it.

i use a two-space indent, as the smallest power-of-two number if spaces visually distinguishable from a single space. But I get the feeling maybe I'm just I'm usually good and distinguishing this, which is why most people use four spaces. That also seems fine to me. everyone agrees eight space indents, which is traditional, is insane. You can also use tab characters to intent, which is kind of what you're supposed to do in a way, but the tab character basically got less and less supported as time went on due to historical accident so I don't think it's worth reviving it now.
(in any case, you should definitely have an auto formatting tool that can take care of this. including changing the tab sizes to whatever you prefer when you edit, and changing back to whatever your organization prefers once you're done editing. It should also handle removing trailing white space and ensuring there is exactly one new line at the end of files (a peculiar requirement of some things that handle files; which I follow for the sake of uniformity, even though I personally think of the new line character as a line separator and not a line terminator...)

digraphic programming fonts seem bad to me, but only because they tend to produce glyphs that are indistinguishable from other distinct characters that already actually exist, like →.

-> is an ugly little contrivance, and should not be used. same with <> for angle brackets. These also make parsing much more complex (although parsing should actually be trivial if you implement it correctly; this is just double the effort of trivial) because you can't count on > to be an operator any more. But this only matters if you're designing a programming language.

Pre-composed characters are the original sin of unicode, and should not have ever been. Just write the program to render the á, what's the problem? When they finally make a new unicode they shouldn't make this mistake again.

I used to think all accent marks were a mistake as well, and all of language should be monospaced by glyph, but that no-longer seems very realistic or desireable to me. They should be easier to type, though... (American keyboard user talking.)

It's weird that the ellipsis is made up of periods (which actually end the sentence more strongly than an ellipsis). A perfect punctuation system wouldn't do that (the fact that … is a distinct unicode character doesn't really help, because it still looks like 3 periods). Also, there wouldn't be an ambiguity between trailing off and ellision of text, as there currently is with ... (I think this is the fault of people appropriating the "text missing" mark in scholarship for the "trailing off" punctuation, so it's our fault, really).

You don't need me to tell you this, no one does any more, but it's crazy that typewriters just had you use the same character for 1 and l. How much money could that have possibly saved? And how much confusion did it incur? And it harmed typography for generations...

As far as I can tell, ligatures like ﬀ should never have been added to unicode, since they're just a font thing for ff. But I think they were added for compatibility reasons.

If you were making a second unicode, you should definitely keep all of their wacky little symbols that they added into unicode despite not knowing what exactly they meant. Like ⍼ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angzarr. You don't have to keep the ones that are like "top half of integral" though. Or do you? Maybe someone has used that on a typewriter to make a really tall integral, with | as its backbone 🤔. You should definitely pick a more accurate name for ☫, though.

I would not have added emoji to unicode. That horse is out of that barn, though, I think. (I mean, I wouldn't have added them to the earlier text encodings that Unicode then endeavored to include, therefore starting the emoji craze.) ... but now that they're in there i can think of about a hundred they should also add. For example, a man flourishing a cape. A very confused dog. I could go on.

ß is a very silly "letter" and german shouldn't have made it (extremely weak opinion of mine). On the other hand, given that they do have it, it's weird that they then invented an "uppercase" version of it, ẞ. It's already weighted like a capital letter. They should have invented a lowercase version of it... (note: This is fine, actually. Don't worry about this one.)

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palochka this letter is very odd.

Bell Hooks' name should be capitalized normally, being a proper noun. Bell Hooks is free to write her own name — or anyone else's name, for that matter — in a stylized way, much as we are free to write it in a normal and proper way. This applies to all people who wish to stylize their capitalizations nonstandardly. (By the way, the standard capitalization for names like McWhatever is like that, with more capitals in the middle at specific point. I didn't make the rules. O'Whatever is a bit more understandable, since it's more clearly two words.) This is despite the fact that names can generally by any arbitrary combination of letters. But orthography of the speaker is not dictated by you, the subject. Cory Doctorow capitalizes "iPhone" as "Iphone", which is logical but I must ultimatley reject — apparently, the rule being that if you're making a brandname you do actually get to determine the written orthography. Although, as another case study, "id Software", the company, is supposed to be written lowercase, which I suppose I'll let them get away with, but if it occurs at the beginning of a sentence I feel that rule takes precedent, in current English orthographic rules, and you should end up writing ". Id Software". طاهر الجمل is an interesting example. To quote https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taher_Elgamal: "The spellings El Gamal and ElGamal are also found in cryptographic literature. He himself spells it Elgamal (one word, singly capitalized), as it is less likely to be mangled in English." This guy is probably pretty chill about how you spell his name<sup>[citation needed]</sup>, and, anyway, I think the conventional orthography for this in English is "El-Gamal", which isn't even found as an option in the wild (according to Wikipedia)... I guess you should just use Elgamal, to make searching for references to him slightly more consistent.

Blue sky idea: The first letter of a sentence shouldn't be capitalized, as that isn't very useful, and creates ambiguities with other usages of capitals.

Blue sky idea: The first-person singular pronoun "I" shouldn't be capitalized, as that isn't very useful, and creates ambiguities with other usages of capitals. This is a crazy rule in the first place, given that we don't capitalize "me", etc. We only tend to capitalize a pronoun if it refers to God, and even then I think that rule is hokey and optional (I only do it myself out of a sense of whimsy). Allegedly people capitalize I because i was more confusable with other letters when you were a scribe writting it out, but I don't see it; at least these days, I is actually a more ambiguous letter, looking more like l, 1, t, roman numberal I (Fun fact: special unicode codepoint:Ⅰ), etc. I guess if you're a scribe you have less luxurious spaces and more latin so it's more ambiguous if a phrase "and whatever I" is actually "and whateveri" or something. Anyway, I don't buy it.

Blue sky idea: maybe all "i"s and "j"s should be dotless.

Maybe there should be a special "abbreviation dot", which is like a period but slightly smaller and slightly raise, to remove the ambiguity between sentence termination and abbreviations.

I habitually leave off the dot in abbreviations, but I could be brought back on board if there were a special abbreviation dot. Also, this should, I suppose, replace the apostrphe. Although I'm not sure then what the apostrophe would be for. So maybe the apostrophe would continue to indicate elision and the abbreviation dot abbreviation — a distinction which seems mostly sensible of sometimes arbitrary.

Are minus and en dash actually distinct symbols? They have distinct uses (which, I note, would be ambiguous if they were the same symbol) and distinct unicode characters, but did printers just use the same symbol for both back in the day? They look pretty identical — or maybe they vary slightly?

All religious leaders of the appropriate type (ministers of the basic type)  are called “priests”, not “pastors” (which are shepherds) or other strange terms like “reverends” (which is in fact a ‘style’) or “father” (he is not your father).

I do not endorse the replacement AD/BC with CE/BCE, for a number of subtle reasons. 1. That's just the name of the thing 🤷 2. They invented it (the current numbering scheme) so they get to name it, and they get to name it in honor of their pal Jesus Christ if they want. Shout out to Pope Gregory you a real one. Pope Julian sucks though. The argument that we should change to CE/BCE to be "more inclusive" is obviously fallacious. (I mainly think of "CE" as "that trend I once saw in a museum" these days. I don't think it has big legs. Also back when I saw it the first time I was more willing to accommodate progressive new ideas. And complete the system of German idealism. But now I think we have too many new bad ideas.)

For the record, it is also fine to just say "year 2", "2 in the proleptic Gregorian calendar", or "ISO (8601) year 2". If you wish to deny the deny the supremacy of the Pope (he of "Gregory" fame), you may say "year 2 of the Improved Calendar". To quote [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gregorian_calendar&oldid=1296639610#cite_ref-8):
> The reform was adopted initially by the Catholic countries of Europe and their overseas possessions. Over the next three centuries, the Protestant and Eastern Orthodox countries also gradually moved to what they called the "Improved calendar",[d]
> d. ^ called such to avoid any suggestion of recognising the authority of Rome. The British Calendar (New Style) Act 1750 restates the algorithm from first principles without any reference to Gregory.

To be clear, it's only fine to say these things out of whimsy. You should just use AD/BC, in contexts where that type of notation is required, and mention the precise calendar you're using if you need to.

There's a longstanding rule that if an adverb-adjective part involves "ly" (it's a little more complicated than that, but whatever), you shouldn't hyphenate it when using it as a compound adjective before a noun. However, I think it's fine to do this, and whether to do it or not is largely based on feel, like non-obligatory commas.

There's sometimes multiple styles of pluralizing a word, such as -s or (for latinate words) -i. Usually, both of these are fine, and it's just a stylistic choice.

Allow me to quote an amusing digression on the topic of plural style from a book, talking about "topoi" vs "toposes" (I don't know the title of the book at the moment, sorry):
> already have observed that I use the English plural; I do so because (in its mathematical sense) the word topos is not a direct derivative of its Greek root, but a back-formation from topology. I have nothing further to say on the matter, except to ask those toposophers† who persist in talking about topoi whether, when they go out for a ramble on a cold day, they carry supplies of hot tea with them in thermoi.

## "Typos" I endorse:

I'm generally pretty lax about alternate spellings of words. There are many valid ways to spell many words in English, wildly attested, and it's fine. (Tangent investigating whether naïvely-implemented spellcheck over-enforced orthography conformity to an arbitrary standard left out here because I'm not sure if it's true.) Also, some of the rules we do have in English are pretty dumb. Why do most words ending in y have the y switched to i when a suffix is added to them, even though keeping the y would be clearer and would be pronounced the same?

You should be writing "suppost" for the sense of "supposed" meaning intended/obligated. That's the way it's pronounced and it's ambigious with "supposed" (thought) otherwise (this is its etymology but not its meaning), which I will note is still pronounced "supposed". It is also permissible to write "suppos't", if you like.

"Layed" is fine for the past tense of lay, but not obligatory. Same for "payed" for the past tense of pay. (btw, both )




